FROM THE BEGINNING OF
HISTORY THE NILE HAS BEEN
THE LIFEBLOOD OF
ONE OF THE GREATEST
CIVILIZATIONS
ON EARTH.
ITS WATERS HAVE FLOWED
AT THE FEET OF ARISTOTLE
AND CLEOPATRA, JOSEPH
AND MOSES, THE CRUSADERS
AND THE PHARAOHS
OF ANCIENT EGYPT.
ALL HAVE BATHED
IN THIS STREAM.
THE EGYPTIANS HAVE ALWAYS
BELIEVED THIS RIVER TO BE
THEIR OWN EXCLUSIVE GIFT FROM
THE GODS AND UP UNTIL RECENTLY
IT WAS ALLOWED TO FLOW
UNHINDERED TO THEIR LANDS.
BUT NOW ALL THIS
IS SET TO CHANGE.
UPSTREAM, ETHIOPIA IS BUSY
BUILDING DAMS WHICH THREATEN
TO CUT OFF EGYPT'S WATER
SUPPLY AT THE SOURCE.
MANY OF THE WARS OF THE 20TH
CENTURY WERE ALL ABOUT OIL,
BUT WARS OF THE 21ST
WILL BE OVER WATER...
WITH THE NILE, THE LONGEST
RIVER IN THE WORLD,
AT THE CENTER
OF THE CONFLICT.
FRESH RUNNING WATER HAS ALWAYS
BEEN THE LIFEBLOOD OF OUR WORLD
BUT IS NOW MORE
PRECIOUS THAN EVER.
OVER THE NEXT 20 YEARS, THE
AMOUNT OF WATER AVAILABLE
TO EVERYONE IS EXPECTED
TO DECREASE BY A THIRD.
BUT THIS STORY ISN'T JUST ABOUT
WATER, IT'S ABOUT THE NILE
AS AN ICON FOR DEEPLY HELD
BELIEFS AND ABOUT A SENSE OF
BELONGING WHICH STRETCHES
BACK A THOUSAND YEARS.
THIS EPIC JOURNEY WILL FOLLOW
THE RIVER BACK TO ITS SOURCE
IN ETHIOPIA, AND, AS THE NILE
WINDS ITS WAY BACK HOME,
ITS WATERS WILL WASH
THROUGH THE LIVES OF PEOPLE
WHO CANNOT
SURVIVE WITHOUT IT.
THE NILE FLOWS FROM THE HEART
OF AFRICA IN TWO MAIN CHANNELS:
THE WHITE NILE WHICH RISES
FROM LAKE VICTORIA IN UGANDA,
AND THE BLUE NILE WHICH FLOWS
FROM THE MOUNTAINS OF ETHIOPIA
AND WHICH HAS NOURISHED
THE GROWTH OF EGYPT
AND ITS CAPITAL, CAIRO.
POUNDING TRAFFIC AND PULSATING
CROWDS FORM THE BACKDROP
TO AN EXHILARATING MIX
OF PRESENT AND PAST.
AND RIGHT THROUGH IT
ALL FLOWS THE RIVER NILE,
THE LIFELINE AND THE
HEART OF THE CITY.
MOST OF THE CITIZENS HERE
TAKE THIS RIVER FOR GRANTED.
FOR THEM, IT'S A NICE PLACE TO
TAKE A WALK WITH THE FAMILY,
A GREAT LOCATION FOR AN
APARTMENT, OR JUST A PLACE
FOR A BIT OF PEACE AWAY FROM
THE CACOPHONY OF THE STREETS.
THEY PROBABLY DON'T EVEN
THINK THAT WITHOUT THIS RIVER
THEY WOULDN'T
EVEN BE HERE.
IN A COUNTRY WITH
HARDLY ANY RAINFALL,
THE NILE GIVES THE PEOPLE
WATER, WORK, FOOD, LIFE.
FOR SOME, IT ALSO GIVES THEM
A PLACE TO LIVE, LIKE ABDULLAH
AND HIS FAMILY WHO LIVE ON
THE NILE ALL YEAR ROUND.
TRANSLATOR: OF
COURSE LIFE IS HARD,
ESPECIALLY WHEN
THE WEATHER IS COLD.
SOME PEOPLE LIVE
VERY COMFORTABLY
AND OTHERS HAVE A
HARD LIFE LIKE US.
BUT WE TRY NOT
TO AIM TOO HIGH.
SOME PEOPLE ARE BORN RICH
AND WE ARE POOR AND HUMBLE.
SUCH IS LIFE.
>>WITH 17 MILLION INHABITANTS
AND STILL GROWING, CAIRO ITSELF
HAS MORE THAN DOUBLED IN
SIZE OVER THE PAST 50 YEARS.
THE CITY IS NOW HOME TO NEARLY
THE SAME NUMBER OF PEOPLE AS THE
WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA, ALL IN ONE
CONFINED CHAOTIC SPRAWLING CITY.
THERE'S JUST NOT ENOUGH
ROOM HERE FOR EVERYBODY
AND SO SOME PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN PUSHED OFF THE LAND
AND ONTO THE RIVER.
TRANSLATOR: I'VE BEEN BROUGHT
UP IN A BOAT WITH MY FATHER.
I WORKED BESIDE HIM AND WITH
HIM BEFORE HE PASSED AWAY
AND I GOT MARRIED.
MY WIFE WAS FROM THE
VILLAGE OF EL MENOUFIA.
I TOLD HER THAT SHE COULD STAY
THERE WITH HER PARENTS BUT SHE
REFUSED AND SAID THAT WE HAVE
TO BE TOGETHER ON THE BOAT.
>>ABDULLAH, SAIFA,
AND THEIR YOUNG FAMILY
LIVE IN A SMALL
COMMUNITY.
THESE WOODEN BOATS
ARE THEIR HOMES.
THEY FISH ON THEM BY DAY
AND SLEEP IN THEM AT NIGHT.
THEY GET ALL THEIR WATER
DIRECTLY FROM THE RIVER,
WASH THEIR CLOTHES,
BATHE THEIR BABIES IN IT.
THEY ALSO EARN A
MEAGER LIVING FROM IT.
TAKING HOME BETWEEN $10 AND
$20 U.S. A DAY FOR THEIR CATCH,
ABDULLAH CAN ONLY BUY THE
BARE NECESSITIES OF LIFE.
THEY COULD NEVER AFFORD
AN APARTMENT OR A HOUSE.
BUT IN SPITE OF THEIR
DIFFICULT LIVING CONDITIONS
ABDULLAH STILL LOVES
HIS LIFE ON THE NILE.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN MY MOTHER
DIED I REMEMBER HER TELLING ME
HOW I WAS BORN ON THE BOAT
BEFORE BEING TAKEN TO HOSPITAL.
I AM LIKE A FISH.
YOU TAKE ME AWAY FROM
THIS RIVER AND I DIE.
I LOVE THE NILE.
>>THIS LOVE AFFAIR WITH THE
NILE LIES AT THE HEART OF THE
EGYPTIAN PSYCHE AND HAS EXISTED
SINCE THE AGE OF THE PHARAOHS
AND THEIR PYRAMIDS.
THESE MONUMENTAL STRUCTURES
ARE ABOUT AN HOUR'S DRIVE AWAY
FROM THE NILE IN GIZA,
FAR ENOUGH THROUGH THE
POUNDING TRAFFIC AND HOT
MESSY CAIRO SUBURBS TO SEEM
COMPLETELY DIVORCED FROM
THE RIVER AND ITS CONCERNS.
BUT IT WASN'T
ALWAYS LIKE THIS.
IN ANCIENT TIMES THE NILE FLOWED
RIGHT BY HERE BECAUSE DURING
THE SUMMER MONTHS THE RIVER
FLOODED AND BROKE ITS BANKS,
WITH THE FLOOD WATERS REACHING
AS FAR AS GIZA AND BEYOND.
THIS NATURALLY RECURRING
PHENOMENON WAS THE SECRET
BEHIND EGYPT'S SUCCESS.
THE LIFE-GIVING FLOODS PROVIDED
THE PHARAOHS WITH A DYNAMIC
SURGE OF WATER WHICH ALLOWED
THEM TO GROW THEIR CROPS
AND FEED THEIR PEOPLE.
IT ALSO ALLOWED THEM
TO CARRY GIANT ROCKS
SO THAT THEY COULD
BUILD THEIR PYRAMIDS.
THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS HAD
NO IDEA HOW THE FLOODS
CAME TO THEM DURING
THE HOT SUMMER
WHEN OTHER NATIONS WITHERED
AND DIED IN THE DRY HEAT
BUT THEY GAVE THEIR GODS ETERNAL
THANKS FOR THE MIRACLE ON WHICH
NOT JUST THE PYRAMIDS BUT
THEIR WHOLE NATION WAS BUILT.
AND TO THIS DAY, EVEN THOUGH
THE FLOODS HAVE DRIED UP
AND THEIR GODS ARE LONG
GONE, THE MONUMENTS
THAT WERE BUILT IN THEIR
HONOR REMAIN AS TESTIMONY
TO EGYPT'S HISTORIC RIGHT
TO OWN AND CONTROL THE NILE.
BUT ANCIENT RIGHTS TO THE
RIVER DON'T ALWAYS ANSWER
THE NEEDS OF
PEOPLE TODAY.
THIS IS A VILLAGE
ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF GIZA
AND RIGHT ON THE
EDGE OF THE DESERT.
COMPARED TO SOME, LOCALS
HERE ARE FAIRLY WELL OFF
BUT THEY STILL HAVEN'T
GOT WHAT THEY NEED MOST...
FRESH RUNNING WATER.
MOST OF THE HOMES HERE HAVE A
TAP, BUT THE MURKY STUFF THAT
COMES OUT OF IT IS JUST TOO
DIRTY TO DRINK AND SO THE LOCALS
HAVE TO EITHER CARRY THEIR
WATER FROM DISTANT STANDPIPES
OR BUY THEIR WATER
FROM PRIVATE VENDORS
AT TWICE THE RATE OF
METERED CONSUMPTION.
TRANSLATOR: THE WATER
FROM THE TAPS IS NO GOOD
FOR DRINKING
AND COOKING.
YOU CAN USE IT FOR DOMESTIC
TASKS BUT MY WATER IS GOOD.
THE VILLAGERS CAN USE IT FOR
DRINKING AND COOKING AS WELL.
>>SAID MOHAMMED ABDUL IS
THE LOCAL WATER SELLER.
HE USED TO HAVE A SPICE
STALL IN THE LOCAL SOUQ
BUT SAW AN OPPORTUNITY
TO MAKE MORE MONEY
SELLING SOMETHING FAR MORE
VALUABLE THAN SAFFRON.
TRANSLATOR: I'VE BEEN
DOING IT FOR EIGHT YEARS.
THE MORE I WORK THE
MORE I GET CLIENTS.
THE INHABITANTS OF THE
VILLAGE, ALL THE CAFES
AND EVERY HOUSEHOLD
NOW BUY MY WATER.
>>THE RECENT POPULATION GROWTH
IN EGYPT HASN'T BEEN MATCHED
BY A GROWTH IN THE
COUNTRY'S INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND SO, FOR THE PEOPLE
LIVING ON THE OUTSKIRTS
THERE'S A DESPERATE
SHORTAGE OF BASIC FACILITIES.
FOR SAID MOHAMMED, HOWEVER,
BUSINESS IS BOOMING,
WITH PEOPLE
THROWING MONEY AT HIM.
THERE ARE 800 WATER
SELLERS IN CAIRO AND GIZA.
WITH THE COUNTRY STILL
GROWING AT AN ALARMING RATE,
THEY'RE WORKING OVERTIME
TO TRY AND MEET DEMAND.
SO SAID MOHAMMED IS SOON
PLANNING TO BUY ANOTHER
HORSE AND CART TO
EXPAND HIS BUSINESS.
IT'S EASY TO SYMPATHIZE WITH
EGYPT'S NEED FOR MORE WATER
AND THE GOVERNMENT IS NOW
DESPERATELY TRYING TO FIND
NEW WAYS OF STRETCHING
THE NILE'S SUPPLY
TO SATISFY THE NEEDS OF
ITS BURGEONING MILLIONS.
BUT SOME PEOPLE SAY THAT THE
COUNTRY'S ALREADY USING UP
MORE THAN ITS
FAIR SHARE.
ITS RIGHT TO ITS OWN WATER
SUPPLY IS NOW BEING CHALLENGED
BY A DESPERATE AND DETERMINED
NEIGHBOR WHO'S PREPARED TO GO
TO EXTREME LENGTHS TO SECURE
ITS OWN STAKE IN THE NILE.
THE SITUATION HAS
NEVER BEEN SO VOLATILE
AND EGYPT HAS BEEN
THREATENING WAR...
WITH ETHIOPIA SET
FIRMLY IN ITS SITES.
THE NILE IN EGYPT FLOWS ALMOST
ENTIRELY THROUGH DESERT.
APART FROM THE THIN STRIPS
OF GREEN WATERED LAND
WHICH BORDER THE RIVER ON
EITHER SIDE, THE WHOLE COUNTRY
IS MADE UP OF
INHOSPITABLE WASTELAND.
SINCE THE STONE AGE,
MOST EGYPTIANS HAVE LIVED
VERY CLOSE TO THE NILE,
DEPENDENT ON IT FOR EVERYTHING.
FROM THE URBAN CENTERS
OF CAIRO AND GIZA, THE NILE
WINDS ITS WAY BACK THROUGH
THE FLATLANDS OF EGYPT TO THE
AGRICULTURAL REGIONS OF THE
NILE VALLEY WHERE, ONCE AGAIN,
THE RIVER PLAYS A
CENTRAL ROLE IN SOCIETY.
HAMMAM AND MOHAMMED ARE
FATHER AND SON FARMERS
WHO OWN A SMALL PIECE OF
LAND IN THE NILE VALLEY.
MOHAMMED, HOWEVER, MAY
BE THE LAST OF A LONG LINE.
TRANSLATOR: MY DAD IS A FARMER,
MY GRANDPARENTS AND MY GREAT
GRANDPARENTS WERE FARMERS,
AND I AM A FARMER.
>>HAMMAM AND MOHAMMED
HAVE WORKED TOGETHER
FROM DAWN TILL DUSK SINCE
MOHAMMED WAS OLD ENOUGH
TO CARRY A FAS (HOE)
OR A MINJAL (SICKLE).
THE PACE OF LIFE FOR THEM HAS AN
ANCIENT RHYTHM AND THIS SCENE
COULD HAVE BEEN WITNESSED
A THOUSAND YEARS AGO.
THEY INHERITED THEIR SKILLS
AND THEIR TOOLS FROM THEIR
FOREFATHERS AND USE THE SAME
IRRIGATION CHANNELS AND CANALS
FIRST COMMISSIONED BY
THE PHARAOHS TO ENSURE
THAT THE NILE NEVER FAILS
TO REACH THEIR CROPS.
MOHAMMED AND HIS ANCESTORS HAVE
ALWAYS PLAYED A CRUCIAL ROLE IN
EGYPTIAN LIFE, BUT THEIR AGE-OLD
POSITION IS NOW UNDER THREAT.
THE LONGEVITY OF THIS ANCIENT
CIVILIZATION REFLECTS MORE THAN
ANYTHING ELSE THE TIME-HONED
SKILLS OF THESE FARMERS,
BUT ALSO THE ETERNAL
FERTILITY OF ITS SOIL -
A POWER WHICH IS
UNPARALLELED IN HUMAN HISTORY.
WHERE OTHER CIVILIZATIONS
WITHERED AND DIED AS THEIR SOILS
WERE EXHAUSTED, EGYPT'S LAND
WAS CONTINUOUSLY REPLENISHED
BY THE ANNUAL FLOODS
WHICH INUNDATED THE COUNTRY
EVERY YEAR.
THESE FLOODS HAD ALLOWED THE
PHARAOHS TO BUILD THEIR TOMBS,
BUT FAR MORE IMPORTANTLY
THEY GAVE EGYPT
AN ANNUAL DEPOSIT OF
RICH AND GLORIOUS MUD
FROM WHICH THEY COULD
GROW AN ABUNDANCE OF FOOD.
TRANSLATOR: THE NILE
IS EVERYTHING FOR THE
EGYPTIAN FARMER AND
EVERYTHING FOR THE LAND.
IN THE GOOD OLD DAYS
THE NILE STOOD FLOODED
FOR THREE MONTHS SO
IT SOFTENED THE SOIL.
THEN, WHEN THE NILE'S
WATER SUBSIDED,
WE COULD START
CULTIVATING.
>>BUT TIMES
HAVE CHANGED.
HUGE DAMMING PROJECTS
UPSTREAM HAVE BEEN BUILT
TO PROVIDE EGYPT WITH A MUCH
NEEDED SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY.
BUT THEY ALSO STEMMED
THE FLOW OF THE RIVER
AND WRECKED THE LIVES
OF THE EGYPTIAN FARMERS.
EGYPT USED TO HAVE SOME OF
THE BEST SOIL IN THE WORLD
BUT THE DAMMING SCHEMES
DESTROYED THE SILTING PROCESS
WHICH HAD NATURALLY
ENRICHED THIS LAND
FOR THOUSANDS
OF YEARS.
MOHAMMED'S FIELDS NOW
YIELD A VERY POOR RETURN.
TRANSLATOR: WE USED TO GROW
OUR CROPS WITHOUT CHEMICALS
BUT NOW WE HAVE
TO USE CHEMICALS.
WITHOUT THEM WE
GET A POOR HARVEST
BUT THE SPRAYS
ARE VERY EXPENSIVE.
>>THE ARTIFICIAL FERTILIZERS
SIMPLY AREN'T AS EFFECTIVE
AS MOTHER NATURE AND
THEY'RE ALSO A BIG DRAIN
ON HIS PROFITS.
IT'S A BLEAK SITUATION
AND MOHAMMED NO LONGER
SEES A FUTURE
HERE FOR HIS SONS.
AS A DIRECT RESULT OF MODERN
DAMMING METHODS AGRICULTURE
IN EGYPT IS IN DECLINE FOR
THE FIRST TIME IN ITS HISTORY
AND FARMERS ARE BEING
FORCED OUT OF A WAY OF LIFE
THAT HAS SUPPORTED THIS NATION
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
AS THE RIVER JOURNEYS TOWARD
EGYPT'S SOUTHERNMOST BORDER
IT'S HARD TO AVOID THE SIGNS
AND SIGNALS THAT THIS IS FAST
BECOMING A VERY MODERN NATION
WITH TOURISM NOW REPLACING
FARMING AS THE MAINSTAY
OF THE EGYPTIAN ECONOMY,
AND WITH THE OLD WAYS GRADUALLY
DISAPPEARING INTO THE SAND.
BUT NO MATTER HOW MUCH LIFE
CHANGES ALONG ITS BANKS,
THE NILE REMAINS AN ETERNAL
AND CONSTANT PRESENCE IN EGYPT.
WHETHER PEOPLE PLOW THE LAND
OR RELAX IN LINEN SUITS ON THE
DECKS OF CRUISE SHIPS, THE RIVER
IS ALWAYS CLOSE AND EVER PRESENT
- THE STAR ATTRACTION FOR
LOCALS AND VISITORS ALIKE.
IN ASWAN, HOWEVER, A CITY VERY
CLOSE TO EGYPT'S SOUTHERN
BORDER, THE RIVER IS UPSTAGED BY
A COLOSSUS WHICH TOOK TEN YEARS
TO COMPLETE AND USED UP
ENOUGH BUILDING MATERIALS
TO HAVE CONSTRUCTED 17
GREAT PYRAMIDS AT GIZA...
THE ASWAN DAM.
HAILED AS EGYPT'S SAVIOR
WHEN IT WAS COMPLETED IN 1970,
THE DAM PROVIDED THE COUNTRY
WITH 90% OF ITS ELECTRICITY.
BUT PERHAPS THE MOST IMPORTANT
REASON FOR BUILDING THIS DAM
HAD NOTHING TO DO
WITH GENERATING POWER.
EGYPT IS THE DRIEST
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD.
THE NILE, ALTHOUGH AN
ALMIGHTY RIVER, HAS SOMETIMES
REVEALED ITSELF AS AN
EXTREMELY VULNERABLE FORCE.
IT IS ALMOST ENTIRELY
DEPENDENT ON UPSTREAM RAINS
TO FEED AND
RENEW ITS FLOW.
AND IN THE PAST,
WHEN THESE FAILED,
THE NILE AND THE WHOLE
OF EGYPT ALSO FAILED.
ONE OF THE WORST EVER DROUGHTS
HAPPENED DURING THE TIMES OF THE
PHARAOHS AND IS RECORDED ON THIS
STONE KNOWN AS THE FAMINE STELE.
THESE HIEROGLYPHS TELL OF
A SEVEN YEAR LONG DROUGHT
WHEN THE RAINS DID NOT
COME AND WHEN THE NILE WAS
TURNED INTO A MUD BAKED
TRENCH AS IF DUG OUT
ESPECIALLY TO RECEIVE THE
DRY CORPSES OF THE NATION.
BUT THE ASWAN DAM
CHANGED EVERYTHING.
IT ALLOWED EGYPT TO STORE
VAST QUANTITIES OF NILE WATER
IN LAKE NASSER AND GAVE
THE COUNTRY DIRECT CONTROL
OVER ITS MOST
PRECIOUS RESOURCE.
FOR OVER 30 YEARS THE DAM HAS
SUPPLIED EGYPT WITH ENOUGH
ELECTRICITY AND WATER TO SATISFY
THE NEEDS OF ALL ITS PEOPLE.
DURING THE 1980'S WHEN ETHIOPIA
SUFFERED YEARS OF TERRIBLE
DROUGHT AND FAMINE, EGYPT WAS
ABLE TO BASK IN THE RESERVES
HELD IN LAKE NASSER...
BUT NOT ANYMORE.
WITH 63 MILLION INHABITANTS NOW
FILLING UP ALL THE AREAS ALONG
THE NILE AND WITH THE POPULATION
EXPLOSION SET TO CONTINUE,
THE ASWAN DAM MAY NOT
BE ENOUGH TO SAVE EGYPT
FROM DYING OF
THIRST IN THE FUTURE.
THE SOLUTION TO THIS
SEEMINGLY IMPOSSIBLE SITUATION
MAY BE FOUND IN THE
MOST UNLIKELY OF PLACES.
THE TOSHKA PROJECT SEEKS TO
RELIEVE POPULATION CONGESTION
AND RECLAIM SOME 4,000
SQUARE KILOMETERS OF LAND
FOR AGRICULTURE BY
IRRIGATING THE DESERT.
TRANSLATOR: I PUT WATER
INTO THE DESERT BECAUSE
I'M CERTAIN
OF SUCCESS.
THE LAND WILL
BECOME FERTILE
AND PEOPLE WILL BE
ABLE TO LIVE HERE.
THE PEOPLE WILL TALK ABOUT THIS
PROJECT AS THEY TALKED ABOUT
THE PYRAMIDS, THE ASWAN
DAM, AND THE PHARAOHS.
>>IRRIGATION SECRETARY, AHMED
MORSI, IS THE GOVERNMENT'S
REPRESENTATIVE
IN TOSHKA.
HE BELIEVES THAT BY
DIVERTING WATER FROM THE NILE
AND PUMPING IT INTO THE
MIDDLE OF THE DESERT,
EGYPT'S FUTURE
WILL BE ASSURED.
BUT TO TURN TOSHKA FROM DESERT
TO SETTLEMENT REQUIRES AN EXTRA
FIVE BILLION CUBIC LITERS OF
WATER EVERY YEAR - A SITUATION
WHICH HAS GREATLY ANGERED
THE OTHER AFRICAN NATIONS.
THE NILE'S WATERS FLOW
THROUGH TEN COUNTRIES
BUT IT'S EGYPT WHICH HAS
ALWAYS BEEN ALLOWED
TO USE MOST OF IT,
A MASSIVE 65%,
LEAVING NEXT TO NOTHING
FOR THE OTHER NATIONS
TO SHARE
BETWEEN THEM.
THE DISTRIBUTION AND OWNERSHIP
OF THE NILE HAS NOTHING TO DO
WITH THE AMOUNT OF WATER WHICH
FLOWS THROUGH EACH COUNTRY.
IT IS IN FACT THE RESULT OF
AN OLD COLONIAL AGREEMENT.
THE 1929 TREATY BETWEEN EGYPT
AND GREAT BRITAIN, WHOSE EMPIRE
AT THE TIME STRETCHED OVER A
GREAT SWATH OF THE NILE BASIN,
GAVE EGYPT THE POWER OF VETO TO
STOP ANY UPSTREAM DEVELOPMENTS
FROM AFFECTING THE AMOUNT
OF WATER REACHING ITS LANDS.
IN RETURN FOR COTTON AND
AN EASY TRADE ROUTE TO INDIA,
THE BRITISH GAVE EGYPT
FULL CONTROL OF THE RIVER
AND A LION'S
SHARE OF ITS FLOW.
THESE RIGHTS ARE
STILL MAINTAINED TODAY.
WHILST OTHER NATIONS
ARE PREVENTED FROM
HARNESSING A SINGLE DROP
OF THE NILE, EGYPT IS NOW
DIVERTING EVEN MORE
OF THIS PRECIOUS RIVER
TO GROW CROPS IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE DESERT.
AHMED, HOWEVER, IS PROMISING
FAITHFULLY TO OFFSET THE USE OF
EXTRA WATER HERE BY LIMITING
CONSUMPTION ELSEWHERE IN EGYPT.
TRANSLATOR: THE PROJECT HAS
NOT AND WILL NOT CAUSE ANY
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN US AND
THE OTHER NILE COUNTRIES.
NONE OF THE RIGHTS OF
OTHER COUNTRIES ARE LOST
AND NEITHER DO WE TAKE
MORE THAN WE DESERVE.
>>BUT CRITICS SAY THAT
EGYPT WILL SOON BE DEMANDING
AN EVEN GREATER SHARE OF THE
NILE THAN IT'S GETTING ALREADY.
WITH THE OTHER NILE NATIONS
FED UP WITH TAKING A BACK SEAT
AND NOW CLAIMING
THEIR RIGHT TO THE RIVER,
WATER WARS COULD SOON BECOME
A VERY REAL AND POTENT DANGER
WITH ETHIOPIA A COUNTRY
ON THE FRONT LINE.
FROM EGYPT THE NILE SNAKES BACK
THROUGH THE DESERTS OF THE SUDAN
BEFORE SPLITTING INTO
TWO SEPARATE STREAMS.
FROM THIS POINT THE NILE BECOMES
TWO RIVERS: THE WHITE NILE WITH
ITS SOURCE IN UGANDA, AND
THE MORE POWERFUL BLUE NILE
WHICH NOW TAKES US TO THE
SOURCE OF OUR STORY - ETHIOPIA.
THE ETHIOPIA WE EXPECT TO SEE IS
A PARCHED AND BARREN COUNTRY,
RAVAGED BY DICTATORSHIP
AND CIVIL WAR
AND LEFT TO ROT
IN THE MIDDAY SUN.
BUT THIS ISN'T THE
WHOLE PICTURE.
ETHIOPIA IS AN INCREDIBLE
COUNTRY OF IMMENSE BEAUTY
WITH AN ABUNDANCE OF
ONE OF THE MOST PRECIOUS
NATURAL RESOURCES
IN THE WORLD...
WATER.
THIS IS THE COUNTRY WHICH
PROVIDES EGYPT WITH 90%
OF ITS WATER SUPPLY AND IS
THE SOURCE OF THE NILE ITSELF.
BUT DESPITE ITS
APPARENT WATER WEALTH,
ETHIOPIA'S PROBLEM HAS
ALWAYS BEEN A CRIPPLING
INABILITY TO USE THE
VAST PERCENTAGE OF IT.
AS THE NILE FLOWS THROUGH A LUSH
BUT ALMOST IMPENETRABLE VALLEY
NAMED THE BLUE NILE GORGE,
IT BECOMES CLEAR THAT
THIS IS A COUNTRY WITH A
VERY DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIP
TO THE ONE THAT EGYPT
HAS WITH THE RIVER.
FAR FROM BEING EVER PRESENT AND
EVER CLOSE, THE NILE IN ETHIOPIA
IS OFTEN TRAPPED BY TERRAIN
MAKING IT IMPOSSIBLE FOR THE
RIVER TO SEEP OUT AND IRRIGATE
THE SURROUNDING LANDS.
IT SEEMS ALMOST TO BE
SWALLOWED UP BY THE LANDSCAPE,
CONSUMED BY
SOME DARK FORCE.
SUPERSTITION HAS LONG HELD THAT
THE BLUE NILE GORGE WHICH
STRETCHES FOR 400 KILOMETERS
RIGHT THROUGH THE HEART OF
ETHIOPIA IS AN EVIL PLACE
POPULATED BY DANGEROUS SPIRITS.
THIS, ALONG WITH ITS
EXTREMELY HARSH GEOGRAPHY,
HAS ALWAYS BEEN A SERIOUS
OBSTACLE, NOT ONLY IN
ACCESSING THE NILE BUT ALSO
IN THE SEARCH FOR ITS SOURCE.
THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
PROBABLY TRAVELED UPSTREAM
AS FAR AS THIS POINT BUT WEREN'T
ABLE TO PENETRATE ANY FURTHER.
IT WAS ONLY IN 1968 THAT THE
GORGE WAS FINALLY NAVIGATED.
AND TO THIS DAY RUMORS OF
DEATHLY RAPIDS, HUGE CROCODILES
AND RUTHLESS BANDITS
DETER WOULD-BE TRAVELERS.
THE CRUEL PARADOX FOR
LOCALS IS THAT EVEN THOUGH
THIS IS THE COUNTRY
WHICH FEEDS THE NILE,
ETHIOPIA HAS NEVER BEEN
ABLE TO USE IT TO FEED ITSELF.
AS THIS JOURNEY TO THE
RIVER'S SOURCE CONTINUES
THROUGH TO THE FARMING
HEARTLAND OF ETHIOPIA,
IT BECOMES DIFFICULT TO GRASP
WHY THIS FRUITFUL COUNTRY
SHOULD STILL BE DEPENDENT
ON FOOD AID FOR ITS SURVIVAL.
BUT ENU TEMESGHEN
KNOWS ONLY TOO WELL
WHY THIS IS
STILL THE CASE.
HE AND HIS WIFE, WOOBIT, OWN
A SMALL FARM JUST AT THE END
OF THE BLUE NILE GORGE IN
THE FOOTHILLS OF ETHIOPIA.
AND EVEN THOUGH THE NILE
HERE FINALLY BREAKS FREE
OF ITS CONFINES TO FLOW
RIGHT THROUGH THEIR FIELDS,
ENU CAN HARDLY USE
A SINGLE DROP OF IT.
TRANSLATOR: THE
NILE IS FAR FOR ME.
I CANNOT AFFORD A MOTOR
PUMP AND I CANNOT FETCH IT
WITH MY BARE HANDS SO ONLY
MY CATTLE DRINK FROM IT.
IF I COULD I WOULD BE VERY HAPPY
TO BRING THE NILE TO MY LAND
BUT IT IS BEYOND
OUR ABILITY.
>>ENU USED TO BE A BUILDER'S
LABORER WITH NOTHING
TO HIS NAME, BUT HE WORKED
HARD AND SAVED UP HIS MEAGER
WAGES TO BUY A SMALL PLOT
OF LAND AND GET MARRIED.
HIS FAMILY NOW WORK
TOGETHER ON THE FARM.
THE DAYS ARE LONG AND HARD, WITH
EACH ONE OF THEM CONTRIBUTING
NOT JUST TO THEIR LIVELIHOOD
BUT TO THEIR SURVIVAL.
UNLIKE EGYPT, THERE ARE HARDLY
ANY IRRIGATION OR WATER STORAGE
SYSTEMS IN ETHIOPIA AND SO
FARMERS HERE ARE ENTIRELY
DEPENDENT ON THE ANNUAL RAINY
SEASON TO GROW THEIR CROPS.
WHEN THERE'S RAIN THERE'S PLENTY
OF FOOD, BUT FOR NINE MONTHS
OF THE YEAR NOT A DROP
WILL FALL FROM THE SKIES.
THEN THIS PLACE WILL BECOME
A DRY AND BARREN DUST BOWL.
THE MOST FRUSTRATING
THING FOR ENU IS THAT
SINCE A LITTLE TRIBUTARY OF THE
NILE FLOWS THROUGH HIS LAND
HE COULD POTENTIALLY IRRIGATE
THEIR FIELDS ALL YEAR ROUND.
BUT INSTEAD ALL THEY CAN DO IS
CARRY LITTLE QUANTITIES OF IT
IN PLASTIC
JERRY CANS.
THIS IS WOOBIT'S JOB.
SHE HAS TO MAKE THIS TRIP
FOUR OR FIVE TIMES A DAY
TO PROVIDE JUST ENOUGH WATER
TO COOK, CLEAN AND WASH.
ENU'S DREAM IS TO SOME DAY BE
ABLE TO AFFORD A WATER PUMP
SO THAT WOOBIT WON'T HAVE
TO DO THIS BACKBREAKING WORK
AND SO THAT HE'LL BE ABLE TO
PROPERLY IRRIGATE THEIR FIELDS.
TRANSLATOR: THEN OUR
COUNTRY WILL BE LIKE A FLOWER.
HAND LABOR WILL BE
REPLACED BY MACHINES
AND WATER WILL BE
USED FOR DEVELOPMENT.
IF THE NILE IS GIVEN
TO THE FARMER,
THE FARM LAND
WILL BE SO BIG.
OH, IF I GET THAT, I
WILL BE A RICH MAN.
>>ALL THIS
SHOULD BE POSSIBLE.
THIS VAST COUNTRY HAS AN
ESTIMATED 37,000 SQUARE
KILOMETERS OF GOOD FARMLAND - AN
AREA LARGER THAN BELGIUM THAT
IF PROPERLY IRRIGATED COULD FEED
ALL ITS PEOPLE ALL YEAR ROUND.
TO DO SO, HOWEVER, WOULD
REDUCE THE RIVER'S FLOW TO EGYPT
DRAMATICALLY AND RESULT
IN ALMOST CERTAIN CONFLICT
BETWEEN THE
TWO NATIONS.
IT'S A POLITICAL STALEMATE
AND IN THE MEANTIME
NOTHING IS BEING DONE TO
HELP THE STARVING PEOPLE
AND STRUGGLING
FARMERS OF ETHIOPIA.
ENU AND HIS FAMILY JUST
HAVE TO MAKE THE MOST OF
THE SUMMER RAINS AND
HOPE FOR A BETTER FUTURE
WHEN ETHIOPIA WILL BE ABLE
TO REALIZE ITS POTENTIAL
AND BLOSSOM INTO A
FULLY DEVELOPED NATION.
BUT FOR NOW THE
UNAVOIDABLE TRUTH
THAT THIS IS A COUNTRY STILL
STRUGGLING TO PROVIDE
ITS PEOPLE WITH THE BARE
ESSENTIALS TO SURVIVE
IS STILL AS GLARINGLY CLEAR
AS THE BRIGHT ETHIOPIAN SUN.
IN A PLACE WHERE HUMAN BEINGS
ARE SO ENTIRELY AT THE MERCY
OF NATURE AND ITS FORCES
ON GOOD SOIL AND GOOD RAINS,
WITH HUNGER AND THIRST
THEIR OLD COMPANIONS,
IT'S HARDLY SURPRISING
THAT SOME PEOPLE HERE
STILL CLING TO THE COMFORT
OF ANCIENT BELIEFS.
IT'S NOT UNCOMMON THROUGHOUT
THIS COUNTRY, BUT ESPECIALLY IN
THE AREAS CLOSEST TO THE NILE,
TO FIND SMALL GROUPS OF PEOPLE
HUDDLED BY THE RIVER
QUIETLY CHANTING VERSES
AND THROWING
OFFERINGS INTO THE WATER.
A PIECE OF BREAD, A CUP OF
COFFEE, OR SOMETIMES A LIVE
SACRIFICE TO GIVE THANKS OR
PERHAPS APPEASE THE GREAT RIVER.
THE WATOW TRIBE IS ONE OF
THE OLDEST IN AFRICA AND THEIR
WAY OF LIFE HAS NOT CHANGED
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
THEY LIVE ON ONE OF
THE NILE'S TRIBUTARIES
ONLY THIRTY KILOMETERS
AWAY FROM ITS SOURCE
AND STILL MAKE BOATS OUT
OF PAPYRUS REMINISCENT OF
THOSE THAT WOULD HAVE
BEEN USED IN ANCIENT EGYPT.
GEBRAI SEMITU IS ONE
OF THE TRIBES' ELDERS.
TRANSLATOR: IT IS KNOWN THAT
THE LIFE OF THE WATOW TRIBE
IS ON THE WATER.
POVERTY IS A BIG PROBLEM
FOR US, MORE THAN EVER.
THE FISH HARVEST
IS DISAPPEARING
AND PAPYRUS IS NOT
FOUND NEAR LIKE BEFORE.
IT IS A DIFFICULT LIFE.
>>THESE PEOPLE ARE UTTERLY
DEPENDENT ON THE NILE
FOR EVERYTHING - THEIR
FOOD AND THEIR FAITH.
APART FROM THE LITTLE MONEY
THEY MAKE BY SELLING BASKETS
IN THE LOCAL MARKET, THEY LIVE
A HAND TO MOUTH EXISTENCE
WITH NO LAND TO FARM
AND NO ANIMALS TO REAR.
THEIR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
RIVER IS ONE OF COMPLETE
RESPECT, BELIEVING THAT THE
NILE IS AN AWESOME FORCE
THERE TO SERVE THE
NEEDS OF ALL THE PEOPLE
BUT BELONGING
TO NONE.
TRANSLATOR: THE NILE IS
THE EARTH'S RESOURCE.
IT BELONGS
TO THE EARTH.
AS IT GOES ON ITS TRAVELS ON
EARTH, IT BELONGS TO NO ONE.
>>ONCE IN A WHILE A SHEEP
IS BOUGHT TO BE SACRIFICED,
BUT TODAY A CHICKEN
SEEMS TO SUFFICE.
THE ANIMAL'S BLOOD WILL
BE POURED INTO THE WATER
MAKING SURE THAT NOT A SINGLE
DROP TOUCHES THE EARTH.
IF IT DID, THE NILE'S
WRATH WOULD BE INCURRED
AND THEN WHO KNOWS
WHAT MIGHT HAPPEN?
TRANSLATOR: THE NILE
IS OUR CARETAKER
AND WE SACRIFICE
FOR IT.
IT SUPPORTS US.
WHEN WE WERE KIDS AND SWAM
IN IT, IT DID NOT HARM US.
THIS IS BECAUSE WE
SACRIFICE FOR IT.
>>OVER RECENT YEARS VILLAGE
ELDERS SEEM WORRIED THAT THEIR
SACRIFICES AREN'T WORKING
AS WELL AS THEY USED TO.
THE NILE AND ITS ENVIRONMENTS
ARE CHANGING, THEY SAY,
AND THEY DON'T KNOW
WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.
AS THE SUN SETS ON THE WATOW
VILLAGE WE CAN BUT PONDER ON
GEBRAI'S WORDS, "THE NILE
BELONGS TO ALL AND YET TO NONE".
WISE WORDS THAT A WISE WORLD
WOULD CHOOSE TO HEAR.
FOR MORE THAN 6,700 KILOMETERS
THE NILE SNAKES THROUGH FORESTS,
SLASHES THROUGH GORGES, AND
FLOATS THROUGH DESERTS
OFFERING SOME OF THE MOST
GRACEFUL SIGHTS IN AFRICA.
IT JOURNEYS PAST MONUMENTS AND
MOUNTAINS, THROUGH LUSH FIELDS
AND URBAN EXPANSE, BUT ITS
HOME IS HERE, IN LAKE TANA,
THE SOURCE
OF THE NILE.
OVER SIXTY SMALL RIVERS RUN
INTO THIS VAST INLAND SEA,
BUT ONLY ONE FLOWS
OUT: THE BLUE NILE.
IT'S HERE, HIDDEN IN ANCIENT
TEXTS, THAT WE WILL UNLOCK
THE SECRET WHY ETHIOPIA
HAS NEVER BEEN ABLE TO
UNLEASH THE POWER
OF ITS RIVER.
THE ETHIOPIAN, OR COPTIC,
CHURCH IS AMONG THE WORLD'S
OLDEST CHRISTIAN
DENOMINATIONS.
CHRISTIANITY HERE GOES
BACK TO THE FOURTH CENTURY
WITH THE ARC OF THE
COVENANT SAID TO BE HIDDEN
SOMEWHERE IN
THESE MOUNTAINS.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT SITES
IS LAKE TANA ITSELF, WITH MANY
ANCIENT MONASTERIES
FOUNDED ON TANA'S 37 ISLANDS.
ONE OF THE MOST CELEBRATED
AND REVERED IS KEBRAN GABRIEL
WHICH STILL HOUSES A
SMALL COMMUNITY OF MONKS,
ALL OF WHOM ARE ENTIRELY
DEPENDENT ON THE LAKE
AND THE NILE FOR THEIR
SPIRITUAL AND DAILY NEEDS.
TRANSLATOR: LAKE
TANA IS IMPORTANT
BECAUSE OF THE
MONASTERIES,
BUT MORE SO BECAUSE THE NILE
FLOWS RIGHT THROUGH IT.
IT'S A PLACE THAT'S
MENTIONED IN THE BIBLE
AND IS ONE OF OUR MOST
PRECIOUS RESOURCES.
>>ABAHI LI'MARYAM HAS LIVED HERE
FOR TEN YEARS SINCE HE WAS 15.
ETHIOPIA IS ONE OF THE MOST
DEVOUT AND CHRISTIAN COUNTRIES
IN THE WORLD.
RELIGION IS EXTREMELY
IMPORTANT HERE,
WITH POLITICS AND FAITH
ALWAYS CLOSELY INTERTWINED.
ETHIOPIA'S SPIRITUAL MAKEUP HAS
BEEN ONE OF THE MAIN REASONS
THE COUNTRY HAS NOT BEEN ABLE
TO UTILIZE THE SACRED NILE.
TO UNDERSTAND MORE WE HAVE
TO FOLLOW ABA MARYAM INTO
THE MONASTERY'S OLD
SCRIPTORIUM WHERE THEY KEEP
PRICELESS RELIGIOUS
ARTIFACTS AND ANCIENT TEXTS.
TRANSLATOR: LOOK, THIS IS
WHERE IT EXPLAINS ABOUT EGYPT.
THIS BOOK WAS MADE OF
PARCHMENT AND IT WAS WRITTEN
A VERY, VERY
LONG TIME AGO.
>>IN THIS BOOK FROM
THE EARLY MIDDLE AGES
THERE'S A NOTE REFERRING
TO AN ABU, OR ARCHBISHOP,
BEING SENT FROM
EGYPT TO ETHIOPIA.
IT'S THIS LINE THAT
HOLDS THE KEY.
IN THE CRUCIAL AREA OF RELIGION,
ETHIOPIA WAS FOR CENTURIES
UNDER THE RULE OF
THE EGYPTIAN CHURCH.
EVEN THEIR ARCHBISHOP,
THEIR ABU, WAS SENT TO THEM
FROM EGYPTIAN HQ.
WITH THAT KIND OF DEPENDANCY
ON EGYPT FOR THEIR SPIRITUAL
HEALTH, ETHIOPIA WAS ALWAYS
KEPT UNDER THEIR YOKE,
AFRAID THAT IF THEY EVER DARED
INTERFERE WITH EGYPT'S LIFELINE
THEN THEY WOULD
LOSE THEIR ARCHBISHOP
AND THEIR OWN
RELIGIOUS HEARTBEAT.
BUT THEN IN 1959, IN AN ACT
WHICH EXPRESSED A GROWING
NATIONAL SELF CONFIDENCE,
THE ETHIOPIANS BROKE AWAY
FROM THE
EGYPTIAN CHURCH.
BY SO DOING THEY RELEASED
THEMSELVES OF ANY SPIRITUAL
DEPENDENCY AND SET THE
STAGE FOR WHAT COULD BE
A CONFLICT OF
APOCALYPTIC PROPORTIONS.
TRANSLATOR: IT'S
A GIFT OF GOD.
IF IT WERE A GIFT OF MAN IT
WOULD HAVE DRIED UP BY NOW,
BUT IT WILL
ALWAYS BE THERE.
WE'LL USE IT
ALL OUR LIVES.
>>WITH HARDLY ANY CONTACT
WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD
ABA MARYAM AND HIS SMALL
COMMUNITY ON LAKE TANA
SEEM UNAWARE THAT
THE FUTURE OF THE NILE
MAY NOW HANG
IN THE BALANCE.
200 KILOMETERS FROM LAKE
TANA, ON ONE OF THE MAIN
DISTRIBUTARIES OF THE NILE,
LOOMS A HUGE CONCRETE
STRUCTURE WHICH COULD
CHANGE THE NILE BASIN FOREVER.
WHEN COMPLETED,
THE TEKEZE DAM WILL BE
ONE OF THE
LARGEST IN AFRICA.
ALTHOUGH THE PLAN AT
THE MOMENT IS TO USE IT TO
GENERATE HYDRO ELECTRICITY,
IT HAS THE POTENTIAL
TO RETAIN A VAST AMOUNT
OF WATER FOR IRRIGATION,
BLOCKING MUCH OF
ITS FLOW TO EGYPT.
IF THE TEKEZE
SCHEME IS SUCCESSFUL,
ETHIOPIA PLANS TO BUILD
MANY MORE DAMS JUST LIKE IT
AND IF THIS HAPPENS SOME
EXPERTS SAY THAT EGYPT'S
WATER SUPPLY COULD BE
REDUCED BY 40% OR MORE.
TRANSLATOR: THE ETHIOPIAN
GOVERNMENT'S FIRST GOAL
IS TO CHANGE THE LIFE OF
THE POOR - GIVE THEM POWER,
BUILD DAMS TO
PROVIDE DRINKING WATER.
THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO
HAVE TO WALK SIX TO SEVEN HOURS
TO FETCH WATER.
THE PRIORITY HERE
IS OUR PEOPLE.
>>ASFOUR SHIGRA IS THE
ETHIOPIAN SITE MANAGER
THAT HAS BEEN WORKING ON
THIS PROJECT FOR SIX YEARS.
HE HARDLY EVER
SEES HIS FAMILY
WHO LIVE IN THE
CAPITAL, ADDIS ABABA.
BUT ALL THE EFFORT AND SACRIFICE
HE SAYS WILL BE WORTH IT.
HIS CHILDREN WERE VERY YOUNG
DURING THE FAMINE OF THE 80'S
AND HE SAYS THAT HE NEVER
WANTS TO LIVE THROUGH
A PERIOD LIKE
THAT AGAIN.
TRANSLATOR: ETHIOPIA IN THE
PAST HAD A LOT OF PROBLEMS.
AT FIRST, OUR PROBLEM WAS
THAT WE WERE UNABLE TO USE
OUR NATURAL RESOURCES
- ESPECIALLY UNABLE
TO USE THE CHEAP
RESOURCES, THE RIVERS.
HENCE THERE WAS BIG
FAMINE IN OUR COUNTRY.
NOW IS THE TIME TO
ERADICATE THAT FAMINE.
>>THE TAKEZE PROJECT WAS ON THE
DRAWING BOARD FOR MANY YEARS
BUT POTENTIAL
WESTERN INVESTORS
SUCH AS THE WORLD BANK
WERE ALWAYS SCARED OFF
BY BELLIGERENT NOISES
FROM THE EGYPTIAN CAPITAL.
SO ETHIOPIA WENT EAST
IN SEARCH OF HELP AND
IN 2002 FOUND A CHINESE
BACKER FOR THIS PROJECT.
THE TAKEZE MARKS A DEFINITE
TURNING POINT IN ETHIOPIA'S
HISTORY AND IN ITS POTENTIAL
TO HARNESS THE NILE.
IT ALSO MARKS THE REALIZATION
OF MANY OF EGYPT'S FEARS.
AFTER THOUSANDS OF YEARS OF
JUST LETTING IT SLIP THROUGH
THEIR FINGERS, ETHIOPIA'S
NEW DETERMINATION AND ABILITY
TO UTILIZE THE BLUE
NILE IS LIKELY TO PUT IT
ON A COLLISION COURSE
WITH EGYPT, THE COUNTRY
WHICH MAKES MOST USE OF
THE WATER DOWNSTREAM.
CONFLICT HAS BEEN THREATENED
BY BOTH SIDES BUT ASFOUR
BELIEVES THAT ALL THIS
DOESN'T HAVE TO LEAD TO WAR.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN WE TAKE SUCH
MEASURES TO FEED OUR PEOPLE,
EGYPT, OUR NEIGHBOR
AND BROTHER,
SHOULD NOT BE NERVOUS
AND SHOULD NEVER BE.
BEFORE THERE WAS NOT MUCH
UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN US.
NOW WE KNOW EACH
OTHER VERY WELL.
>>FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN HISTORY
ALL TEN NILE BASIN STATES ARE
MEETING AROUND ONE TABLE
TO DISCUSS HOW BEST
TO SHARE THE RIVER.
DESPITE ASFOUR'S OPTIMISM,
RELATIONS ARE STILL TENSE
AND AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
COUNTRIES IS A LONG WAY OFF.
THERE IS HOPE, HOWEVER,
WITH ETHIOPIA AND EGYPT
NOW STARTING TO WORK
TOGETHER TO FACE REALITIES
AND FIND A SOLUTION TO
THEIR CONFLICTING DEMANDS.
ONE THING IS CERTAIN, TO AVERT
DISASTER THERE WILL HAVE TO BE
COMPROMISE
ON BOTH SIDES.
WAR CAN ONLY BE AVOIDED IF EVERY
COUNTRY BEGINS TO SEE THE RIVER
AS A GIFT FOR ALL
BUT A PRIZE FOR NONE.
THE NILE, MORE THAN ANY
OTHER RIVER IN THE WORLD,
EVOKES A FEELING OF CONTINUUM,
AN EVERLASTING PRESENCE.
FROM ARISTOTLE AND MOSES
THROUGH TO PRESENT DAY POLITICS
THE NILE FLOWS THROUGH
THE WORLD'S CONSCIOUSNESS
AND ITS HISTORY.
NOW IS THE TIME TO MAKE SURE
IT FLOWS THROUGH ITS FUTURE.